### Analysis Proposal

#### Emily Tom

##### 10/26/2022

The overall goal of this research project is to identify changes in the transcriptome in retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells during aging. To accomplish this, I will perform RNA sequencing on RPE derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) lacking *ELOVL2* (Elongation of Very Long Chain Fatty Acids Like-2). The rationale for this approach is that DNA methylation of several CpGs in the regulatory region of *ELOVL2* is the most reproducible biomarker of aging and that activity of ELOVL2 declines in the aging retina. *ELOVL2* encodes a transmembrane protein that plays critical roles in the biosynthesis of omega-3 docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) (22:6n-3) and very long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (VLC-PUFAs), which are highly enriched in photoreceptors and essential for maintaining healthy visual function. Therefore, the identification of genes regulated by ELOVL2 in the RPE will reveal pathways that may be involved in age-related visual decline and retinal pathologies such as age-related macular degeneration.

The specific dataset I will analyze will be generated from first isolating RNA from wildtype and *ELOVL2* knockout iPSC-RPE, which will then be sequenced by the UCI Genomics Research and Technology Hub. (*Note: As a backup dataset, I have ChIP-Seq data from a previous experiment, also from ELOVL2 knockout iPSC-RPE.*) Each group will contain three biological replicates. First, I will download the FastQ files from the Institute for Genomics and Bioinformatics (IGB) servers and verify their integrity using the provided md5sum values. Then, I will use FastQC to perform a quick check of the sequencing data. Reads will be trimmed using Trimmomatic to remove adapter sequences and sequences with poor quality. I will use Hisat2 to align reads to the human GRCh38 genome, which is a prebuilt index. Because Hisat2 produces an unsorted bam file of the alignment, I will then need to sort the bam file with samtools and index the sorted bam file so it can be viewed on the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV). Next, I will use FeatureCount, which is a program that is a part of the Subread package, to count how many of the aligned reads map to genomics features, such as genes, exons, etc. At this point, I should have obtained raw counts from my FastQ files. To perform differential expression analysis of the RNA-Seq data, I will use the DESeq2 package from Bioconductor in R. To visualize the data, I will use the ggplot2 package to create plots from the data, including a volcano plot to compare p-value vs. fold change. To visualize hierarchical clustering, I will generate a heatmap with the pheatmap package.

The wildtype and *ELOVL2* KO iPSC-RPE have been set up for this RNA sequencing experiment and have been differentiating for the past 3 months. They now exhibit clear, hexagonal borders and pigmentation, which are markers of well-differentiated RPE cells. Using the knowledge gained from this class, this analysis proposal will be highly feasible.
